dbt-databricks migration doc (#2537)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/migration/tools/migrating-from-spark-to-databricks.md

id: "migrating-from-spark-to-databricks"
---

You can use the [dbt-databricks adapter](https://github.com/databricks/dbt-databricks) to establish a dbt connection with Databricks, instead of the `dbt-spark` adapter. In collaboration with dbt Labs, Databricks built this adapter using dbt-spark as the foundation and added some critical improvements. With it, you get an easier set up &mdash; requiring only three inputs for authentication &mdash; and more features through the Delta table format.

## Simpler authentication

Previously, you had to provide a `cluster` or `endpoint` ID which was hard to parse from the `http_path` that you were given. Now, it doesn't matter if you're using a cluster or an SQL endpoint because the [dbt-databricks setup](/reference/warehouse-setups/databricks-setup) requires the _same_ inputs for both. All you need to provide is:

> - the hostname of the Databricks workspace

Reviewer: I think we can remove "the" and "an" in the bullets without losing any meaning.

- the HTTP path of the Databricks SQL warehouse or cluster

> - an appropriate credential

Reviewer: Should credential be plural? If it's just the token they need (singular) then maybe we should specify they need a token?

Edit: I see it's plural later, so let's make them the same!

For more information on defaults, see [Caveats](/reference/warehouse-setups/databricks-setup#caveats).

## Pure Python

If you use dbt Core, you no longer have to download an independent driver to interact with Databricks. The connection information is all embedded in a pure-Python library called `databricks-sql-connector`.

## Migrate your dbt projects

In both dbt Core and dbt Cloud, you can migrate your projects to the Databricks-specific adapter from the generic Apache Spark adapter.

### Prerequisites

- Your project must be compatible with dbt 1.0 or greater. Refer to [Upgrading to v1.0](/guides/migration/versions/upgrading-to-v1.0) for details. For the latest version of dbt, refer to [Upgrading to v1.3](/guides/migration/versions/upgrading-to-v1.3).
- For dbt Cloud, you need administrative (admin) privileges to migrate dbt projects.

<!-- tabs for dbt Core and dbt Cloud -->
<Tabs>

> <TabItem value="core" label="dbt Core">

Reviewer: This is a tiny nit, but can we make Cloud first? It is first alphabetically and it looks like the 1st tab is the selected by default, so I think that might be preferred

1. Modify your `target` in your `~/.dbt/profiles.yml` file

Anyone who's using your project must also make these changes in their environment.

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="cloud" label="dbt Cloud">

To migrate your dbt Cloud projects to the `dbt-databricks` adapter from `dbt-spark`, you must have admin privileges. The migration shouldn't cause any downtime for production jobs. dbt Labs recommends that you schedule the connection change when usage of the IDE is light to avoid disrupting your team.

1. Select **Account Settings** in the main navigation bar.
2. On the **Projects** tab, find the project you want to migrate to the dbt-databricks adapter.
3. Click the hyperlinked Connection for the project.
4. Click **Edit** in the top right corner.
5. Select **Databricks** for the warehouse
6. Select **Databricks (dbt-databricks)** for the adapter and enter the:
    1. `hostname`
    2. `http_path`
    3. (optional) catalog name
7. Click **Save**.

Everyone in your organization who uses dbt Cloud must refresh the IDE before starting work again. It should refresh in less than a minute.

> #### Your credentials with the migration

Reviewer: I feel like this section should possibly talk about what you see and what you should do when the authentication doesn't work. I'm a little unclear what my takeaway should be here?

Reviewer: Also, should we link to the appropriate docs for how to authenticate if you can't? I think these might be the ones how to link a warehouses?

Author: My takeaway when I was going through this content was: You do not need to reenter your credentials with the migration. 

Maybe I should start with that ^ then explain why credentials don't need to be inputted again. Lemme give that a try!

Reviewer: That works, Ly!

If you can connect to Databricks using the dbt-spark ODBC method, it means:

- You already supplied your credentials to dbt Cloud.
- You already added your personal access token (PAT) in your dbt Cloud profile to develop in the IDE for a given project.
- Someone with admin privileges already added an access token for each deployment environment so dbt Cloud can connect to Databricks during production jobs.

Because of this, people will not lose their credentials when migrating to the `dbt-databricks` adapter. This makes the migration easier as it only requires deleting the connection and re-adding the cluster or endpoint information. No one needs to reenter their personal access tokens for the project.

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

<!-- End tabs for dbt Cloud and dbt Core -->

> ### Example

Reviewer: Just a tiny not. should we say "Examples?"

> Below are examples of the `profiles.yml` file. It shows what authentication setup is like with `dbt-spark` and how much simpler is it with `dbt-databricks` when connecting to an SQL endpoint. A cluster example is also effectively the same.

Reviewer: Maybe we can use "the following" instead of "below" to make it more accessible.
```suggestion
You an use the following examples of the `profiles.yml` file to see the authentication setup with `dbt-spark` compared to the simpler setup with `dbt-databricks` when connecting to an SQL endpoint. A cluster example would look similar.
```

1. Select **Account Settings** in the main navigation bar.
2. On the **Projects** tab, find the project you want to migrate to the dbt-databricks adapter.
3. Click the hyperlinked Connection for the project.
4. Click **Edit** in the top right corner.
5. Select **Databricks** for the warehouse
6. Select **Databricks (dbt-databricks)** for the adapter and enter the:
    1. `hostname`
    2. `http_path`
    3. (optional) catalog name
7. Click **Save**.

Everyone in your organization who uses dbt Cloud must refresh the IDE before starting work again. It should refresh in less than a minute.

#### About your credentials

When you update the Databricks connection in dbt Cloud for the migration, your team will not lose their credentials. This makes migrating easier since it only requires you to delete the Databricks connection and re-add the cluster or endpoint information.

With a successful connection to Databricks using the `dbt-spark` ODBC method, the following credentials will not get lost:

> - The credentials you supplied to dbt Cloud to connect to your Databricks workspace.

Author: ```suggestion
- The credentials you supplied in dbt Cloud to connect to your Databricks workspace.
```
